[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed I was in a desert and I had been there for a week without food or water.
[Amit Varma]: I was hungry.
[Amit Varma]: I was thirsty.
[Amit Varma]: I was craving for social media because my phone battery had also died a week ago.
[Amit Varma]: But all around me there was only an expanse of sand.
[Amit Varma]: The blistering desert wind burnt my skin.
[Amit Varma]: The soles of my foot felt like leather.
[Amit Varma]: And just as the sun radiated heat, my throat radiated pain.
[Amit Varma]: I needed water.
[Amit Varma]: Just then, in the distance, I saw a stall.
[Amit Varma]: A stall?
[Amit Varma]: In the middle of the desert?
[Amit Varma]: I ran towards the stall.
[Amit Varma]: Or rather, I stumbled towards the stall, like a kid in a sack race in school.
[Amit Varma]: I reached the stall and there was a sign on it that said, The Right to Water Act, India.
[Amit Varma]: RTW.
[Amit Varma]: But there was no one in the stall.
[Amit Varma]: There was no attendant.
[Amit Varma]: There were no bottles of water.
[Amit Varma]: It was empty.
[Amit Varma]: The wind was howling.
[Amit Varma]: And for a few moments, I got down on my knees and howled with the wind.
[Amit Varma]: And then, I pulled out a plank of wood from the stall and started eating it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhatma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, my weekly podcast on the seen and unseen effects of
[Amit Varma]: public policy.
[Amit Varma]: My topic for discussion today is the Right to Education Act.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the Right to Education Act sounds beautiful and was framed with the best intentions.
[Amit Varma]: But we judge public policy not by intentions, but by their outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: To discuss the unseen effects of the Right to Education, I have with me on the show today
[Amit Varma]: Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek is a journalist who has worked at DNA and the Economic Times, among other papers,
[Amit Varma]: and is currently a columnist at Equity Master.
[Amit Varma]: He is the author of the Easy Money Trilogy, and his most recent book is India's Big Government,
[Amit Varma]: The Intrusive State and How It's Hurting Us, published by Equity Master.
[Guest]: Vivek, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me over, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, just by the name of it, the Right to Education sounds so wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: What's wrong with it?
[Guest]: Oh, I mean, it's wrong at multiple levels.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, to give you a little bit of background, I mean, India got its independence
[Guest]: in 1947.
[Guest]: And somewhere in the mid 50s, a gentleman called PC Mahalanobis, who worked as the honorary
[Guest]: statistical advisor to the government of India came onto the scene.
[Guest]: And he was very close to the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Guest]: And between him and Nehru, we came up with what is called as the second five-year plan.
[Guest]: And at the heart of the second five-year plan was this idea to essentially build public
[Guest]: sector enterprises and huge projects.
[Guest]: So we ended up, you know, we built steel plants, we built huge dams, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So the idea was to unleash economic growth through industrial expansion, built and financed
[Guest]: by the government.
[Guest]: Now, when the government went about building these, you know, projects, they needed people
[Guest]: who could build these projects and who could eventually run and manage it.
[Guest]: So the focus, because of, you know, what I call the Nehru-Mahalanobis model in my new
[Guest]: book was on higher education.
[Guest]: And you know, in the process, we ended up setting the Indian Institute of Technologies
[Guest]: at, I think, five different places initially, then we set up the IIMs.
[Guest]: Or temples of higher learning.
[Guest]: Temples of higher learning to sort of manage the temples of modern India, as all these
[Guest]: projects were called as.
[Guest]: And what happened in the process was that primary education, which should have been
[Guest]: very, very important for a newly independent nation, got totally ignored.
[Guest]: And as a result, even now, I mean, the latest figures that are available are as per the
[Guest]: 2011 census, we have a literacy rate of only 74%.
[Guest]: Now, the issue there is that even that 74% does not, you know, it may sound quite a lot,
[Guest]: but it does not essentially reflect the reality of the day.
[Guest]: Now, one point is that we still have the highest number of illiterate people in the world.
[Guest]: And the second point is that the literacy number does not give you an idea of the number
[Guest]: of years an average Indian spends in school.
[Guest]: Now, an average Indian spends around 5.4 years in school, okay.
[Guest]: For men, it's 7.2 years, for women, it's 3.6 years.
[Guest]: So an average Indian essentially studies up until what we call the primary level, class
[Guest]: fifth, class fourth.
[Guest]: And all this is because of the Nehru Mahalanobis model, which concentrated on only higher education.
[Guest]: The other point is that we still have around 28 crore illiterate people, which is the highest
[Guest]: in the world, when it comes to, you know, absolute numbers.
[Guest]: And it is really a shame that, you know, 70 years after independence, you know, so many
[Guest]: people continue to be illiterate.
[Guest]: Now, somewhere, you know, at the turn of the century, the politicians of this country rightly
[Guest]: realized that primary education needs to be encouraged, and things which have gone wrong
[Guest]: for so long need to be corrected.
[Guest]: So over a period of time, between 2002 and 2009, you know, the parliament ended up passing
[Guest]: the right to education.
[Guest]: And right to education came into full force on April 1st, 2010.
[Guest]: Now, it essentially makes right to education a fundamental right.
[Guest]: And free and compulsory education needs to be made available to children or other individuals
[Guest]: between the age of 6 and 14 at a neighborhood school.
[Guest]: Now, this is the basic premise.
[Guest]: So, you know, like a lot of government ideas, the premise is good, I mean, children do need
[Guest]: to go to school.
[Guest]: But there are a lot of other things which come with it, which have essentially led to
[Guest]: a situation where the learning outcomes of children have actually started to fall.
[Guest]: Now, if I may sort of give you some data here from my book, you know, in 2010, 48% of children
[Guest]: in Standard 3 could read at least Standard 1 text.
[Guest]: That is not a great number to have.
[Guest]: But even that, by 2014, had fallen to around 40.3%.
[Guest]: And similarly, if you look at, you know, other learning outcomes, you know, the ability to
[Guest]: do math, which has fallen dramatically, or the ability to read a single sentence in English,
[Guest]: so all these learning outcomes have come down.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is that they have come down much more dramatically in case of government
[Guest]: schools, schools run by this, you know, primarily the state governments.
[Guest]: Now, why has this happened?
[Guest]: Is a question worth asking?
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to that, I just want to rewind a bit to talk about the journey which brought
[Amit Varma]: us to the RTE.
[Amit Varma]: So I used to write a fair bit about education, maybe a decade ago, before the RTE.
[Amit Varma]: And learning outcomes were absolutely abysmal back then.
[Amit Varma]: And there were a number of reasons for that, ways in which the government had messed up.
[Amit Varma]: And it doesn't just have to do with not giving primary education enough importance, but the
[Amit Varma]: way the whole education system was structured.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we have a scene in the Unseen episode with Parth Shah.
[Amit Varma]: So if you go into our archives, you can check that out.
[Amit Varma]: And among the many things that were wrong is that a, the private sector was heavily
[Amit Varma]: discouraged in this sense, incentivized from setting up private schooling.
[Amit Varma]: So providing education for a profit motive was more or less banned through a panoply
[Amit Varma]: of crazy laws in the country.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't it still banned?
[Amit Varma]: It is still banned.
[Amit Varma]: And there were and are an insane web of regulations that private schools had to comply with, like
[Amit Varma]: your playground size must be this much, this is your, you know, you must have this many
[Amit Varma]: toilets and so on, which a lot of low cost private schools like those which would spring
[Amit Varma]: up in slums and so on, would not be able to cater to and therefore they were operating
[Amit Varma]: at the edge of, I mean, they were essentially illegal, liable to be shut down anytime.
[Amit Varma]: And so that's the way it was, and at the same time, outcomes in government schools are miserable
[Amit Varma]: because there was no accountability.
[Amit Varma]: Competition brings accountability, they didn't face any competition, and therefore you had
[Amit Varma]: terrible outcomes with rampant teacher absenteeism, where up to 35% of teachers on any given day
[Amit Varma]: at any government school in India are simply not there.
[Amit Varma]: If there are two teacher schools, like you've pointed out in your excellent chapter in your
[Amit Varma]: book, you'll often find the two teachers in a two teacher school just alternating and
[Amit Varma]: the two of them never being there at the same time, because there's no accountability.
[Amit Varma]: And because of that, you often had a situation where a desperately poor family in a slum
[Amit Varma]: where say someone's an auto driver, instead of sending his kid to a government school,
[Amit Varma]: which is free with a midday meal, he would send them to a low cost private school because
[Amit Varma]: even though he had to pay for it out of his hard earned money, he would still feel that
[Amit Varma]: his child was getting a better quality of education there and obviously the choice should
[Amit Varma]: have been his.
[Amit Varma]: So now these are all the sort of structural problems that you would expect a government
[Guest]: to take into account and fix with whatever the reform was, and none of that happened.
[Guest]: So basically, if you look at the right to education, it is very, very input driven.
[Guest]: So essentially, as you said, you know, a private school needs to have, you know, it needs to
[Guest]: have a boundary wall.
[Guest]: If it doesn't have a boundary wall, it needs to be fenced.
[Guest]: So it needs a certain number of toilets, it needs, you know, library books.
[Guest]: So it's extremely input driven.
[Guest]: But that is one problem, because a lot of these private schools, especially the low
[Guest]: cost ones, obviously are not in a position to fulfill, you know, these things.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at, if you look at data, you know, an average, and this is I think
[Guest]: as per, you know, I think NSS data, where an average private school, the fee in urban
[Guest]: areas is around 416 rupees or something, and it's 300 rupees in rural areas.
[Guest]: Now, at that level, expecting them to have all these, you know, all this infrastructure
[Guest]: is a little difficult.
[Guest]: That's one part.
[Guest]: The other major problem with RTE is that it expects the teachers to finish the syllabus,
[Guest]: okay.
[Guest]: Now, there is a, you know, if you read the Bayer Act, there is a line in it in which,
[Guest]: you know, the line which clearly says that teachers need to cover the syllabus during
[Guest]: the course of the year, and which is where the entire problem starts.
[Guest]: You know, first thing is that teachers are absent, okay.
[Guest]: Now, teachers, if you look at different kinds of data, are absent from 15 to 25% of the
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: Now, other than that, students are also absent.
[Guest]: You know, the interesting bit is that, you know, the probability of the student and the
[Guest]: teacher being there in the class on the same day is very, very low.
[Guest]: So, students are also absent, 35%, 30-35% is the average rate.
[Guest]: And students, and it's like a chicken and egg story.
[Guest]: So, students, why are students absent?
[Guest]: I mean, there is research that's been done in that area as well.
[Guest]: Students are absent because teachers are absent.
[Unknown]: That's one reason.
[Guest]: The other reason is that, you know, schools are not in the neighborhood, or there is some
[Guest]: work at home.
[Guest]: You know, if someone is ill, if a man in a family is ill, then the boy who goes to school
[Guest]: is then sent to the field.
[Guest]: If a woman is ill, then the girl is not sent to school, she's sent into the kitchen.
[Guest]: And what is also, you know, problematic is that the entire focus of teaching in India
[Guest]: is in and around rote learning, okay.
[Guest]: So, all these factors, you know, when they sort of mix up, lead to a situation where
[Guest]: the learning outcomes are not too good.
[Guest]: And they have been falling dramatically since the right to education became the order of
[Guest]: the day.
[Guest]: Now, the interesting thing is, you know, a few years back, I happened to interview this
[Guest]: gentleman called Abhijit Banerjee.
[Guest]: And then I also heard him speak at a literature festival.
[Guest]: He's written a book, Poor Economics, I mean, he and his, now his wife, Esther Duflo, wrote
[Guest]: the book, Poor Economics.
[Guest]: They are both economists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
[Guest]: So he made a very interesting point.
[Guest]: And he said that, you know, he had carried out a small experiment in Bihar, where the
[Guest]: teachers were basically trained for some time, not to come teach the syllabus, but to teach
[Guest]: the students what they did not know.
[Guest]: So if a student did not know what to, you know, how to write, he was taught how to write.
[Guest]: If he did not know how to read, he was taught how to read.
[Guest]: If he did not know basic maths, he was taught basic maths.
[Guest]: And over a period of time, the results were very, very good.
[Guest]: The students who were sort of laggards caught up with the students who were doing well.
[Guest]: So there is experimental evidence which shows that if, you know, during the initial years,
[Guest]: if we do not teach, you know, history and geography and everything else, you know, let's
[Guest]: say in the initial three to four years, and concentrate on teaching the students what
[Guest]: they need to know, instead of trying to complete the syllabus, you can actually improve the
[Guest]: learning outcomes.
[Guest]: Now, you know, it is a very interesting paragraph in my book, which, you know, which I just
[Guest]: like to read out.
[Guest]: And this is something that Abhijit Banerjee said at a literature festival a few years
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: And I happened to be there and I recorded it.
[Guest]: And he says, the reason was that they were asked to do a job that actually made sense.
[Guest]: They were asked to teach children what they did not know.
[Guest]: The usual jobs teachers are asked to do is to teach the syllabus, which is very different.
[Guest]: Under the Right to Education Act, every year, you're supposed to cover the syllabus.
[Guest]: I mean, as I said, it doesn't matter whether the children understand anything.
[Guest]: Think of all the standard four children who can't read.
[Guest]: They are learning social studies and all kinds of other wonderful things, except that they
[Guest]: can't read.
[Guest]: They are learning nothing, they're sitting in a class watching some movie in some foreign
[Guest]: language without subtitles, hence dropout rates are high.
[Guest]: And I'm shocked why anybody comes to school at all, okay.
[Guest]: The problem of education has a perfectly good solution.
[Guest]: In the first four years, we should prioritize the learning of basic skills.
[Guest]: Forget about learning the history of the country, etc.
[Guest]: You don't have to know who Gandhiji was for the first four years.
[Guest]: Let's just concentrate on students being able to read and do simple maths.
[Guest]: I think that such a system would deliver a much better outcome.
[Guest]: The other interesting thing is that, you know, again, this has got to do with the way the
[Guest]: syllabus is structured, that, you know, when a student joins standard one, you know, when
[Guest]: the RTE actually comes in, he doesn't come from a very text-heavy environment, okay.
[Guest]: You know, the chances are that his parents are illiterate, his or her parents are illiterate,
[Guest]: or they perhaps barely went to school.
[Guest]: Whereas the syllabus of RTE is so designed that, rather the syllabi across various states
[Guest]: are so designed that all the reading, you know, the reading part of teaching comes to
[Guest]: end by standard one.
[Guest]: Now, for people who, you know, do not come from a text-heavy environment, this is extremely,
[Guest]: extremely criminal.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, just if, you know, if I could read out a paragraph from a report put out
[Guest]: by the, you know, put out by ACER, it's the annual status of education report of 2013,
[Guest]: in which they say that analysis of different standard one textbooks across states reveals
[Guest]: many underlying assumptions related to content, method, pace.
[Guest]: At age five, children's ability to learn needs to be scaffolded well.
[Guest]: But in most states in standard one, curriculum covers a great deal of content very quickly
[Guest]: so that many children get left behind even before they get started.
[Guest]: You know, and again, something that, you know, Esther Duflo also said, by the end of grade
[Guest]: one, they are supposed to be done with reading.
[Guest]: It's a complete fantasy.
[Guest]: Learning is not about enrollment, teacher-student ratio, or having latrines in schools.
[Guest]: It's about if we are serious about learning.
[Guest]: And the entire, you know, the way our education system is structured, and the way the right
[Guest]: to education is structured, the focus is clearly not on learning.
[Guest]: It's on completing the syllabus.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually a very profound and poignant insight.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just the thought of a class full of kids not being able to understand what is
[Amit Varma]: taught is incredibly sad.
[Guest]: And, you know, there is one point that I forgot, that in RTE essentially ensures that everybody
[Guest]: gets promoted.
[Guest]: So, you know, here you are, you probably don't, you know, know even how to read.
[Guest]: But because there are no exams, you know, you've reached class five or class six.
[Guest]: Which is not doing a favor to the kid.
[Guest]: It's stopping him from learning.
[Guest]: And one day he has to write exams.
[Amit Varma]: What will he do on that day?
[Amit Varma]: And that's, that's why the dropout rates are…
[Amit Varma]: And this, it also, I think, has enormous issues of self-esteem on the poor kids who have to
[Amit Varma]: go through this.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, very, very, you know, some time back, I sort of, I was at the passport
[Guest]: office.
[Guest]: I mean, I got my passport made some seven, eight months back.
[Guest]: And I had a very, you know, very, very, I mean, I mean, interesting is not, not the
[Guest]: right word, but it wasn't something that I was expecting at that point of time.
[Guest]: So I'd gone there because there's some police verification had raised some issues.
[Guest]: And so, I mean, I'd gone to sort that out.
[Guest]: And there's this, you know, well-dressed guy, you know, wearing a pair of sunglasses
[Guest]: and has a smartphone in his hand, going around, you know, requesting something to people.
[Guest]: And everybody, you know, sort of asked him to sort of go away.
[Guest]: And then he finally came to me.
[Guest]: And I realized that essentially what he was asking was, you know, asking people to write
[Guest]: an application.
[Guest]: I mean, there was a certain problem in his passport application.
[Guest]: An application, you know, needed to be written, explaining as to what the scene was.
[Guest]: And nobody was willing to do it for him.
[Guest]: So I said, kya problem kya hai?
[Guest]: So, nahi sahab, matlab mujhe theek se matlab padhna likhna nahi aata hai.
[Guest]: So I wrote out an application for him in English and I explained it to him that this is what
[Guest]: I've written.
[Guest]: So I said, then I asked him, you know, kya padhe vade nahi ho, kya anpad ho?
[Guest]: Bala, nahi sir, metric pass hai.
[Guest]: So you know, a metric pass guy, which is basically 10th standard, not being able to write an
[Guest]: application.
[Guest]: And it's not like you have to write an application in English.
[Guest]: You can write an application in any language you're comfortable with.
[Guest]: So you know, he could have written an application in Hindi and it would have been processed.
[Guest]: Now, if, and obviously, I mean, this is a one-off example, but you know, a guy who's
[Guest]: passed his 10th standard and cannot put together an application, I mean, that is really a very
[Amit Varma]: sad reflection of our education scenario.
[Amit Varma]: It's illustrative.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, and just going back to the whole thing of syllabi and the way the education
[Amit Varma]: curriculum is designed in a top-down way from the center, seems to me a big failing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what I would imagine would work best is if you just allow the market to function
[Amit Varma]: the way it should, where you have inputs and natural feedback from parents and accordingly
[Amit Varma]: schools spring up to satisfy those specific demands.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, the problem is that we have always tried to address issues from
[Guest]: the supply side and not from the demand side.
[Guest]: Now, from the demand side, how would things work?
[Guest]: Things would work if there is some competition between schools to attract kids, right?
[Guest]: And that would work if, you know, instead of having free schools, free government schools,
[Guest]: we would have a sort of a voucher-based system wherein, you know, we give cash or, you know,
[Guest]: vouchers.
[Guest]: Where schools have to compete.
[Guest]: And, you know, so it will be very obvious, you know, there will be data for parents to
[Guest]: see as to where students are doing well.
[Guest]: And then accordingly, they would, you know, try and get their children admitted in those
[Guest]: schools and then those schools would get the money that the parents have.
[Guest]: But, you know, obviously nothing of that sort is really going to happen anytime soon.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I knew the education system was broken, but what has come as an insight to
[Amit Varma]: me in this conversation was just that one aspect of the RTE, the insistence that teachers
[Amit Varma]: have to finish their curriculums and that there are no exams for kids to go ahead, can
[Amit Varma]: have such a drastically bad impact on learning outcomes and actually cause many people to
[Amit Varma]: drop out more than they otherwise would.
[Amit Varma]: What are the other sort of unseen effects of the RTE?
[Guest]: I mean, it's a mammoth…
[Guest]: So yes, it is.
[Guest]: You know, the other unseen effect is, you know, between in the period of 10 years to
[Guest]: 2015, close to 10 crore individuals have passed out of the Indian education system who cannot,
[Guest]: you know, do basic reading, writing or some amount of basic maths.
[Guest]: Now, this is a number that has, you know, has been put out by a gentleman called Madhav
[Guest]: Chauhan who is the president of the Pratham Education Foundation which does these annual
[Guest]: status of education reports every year.
[Guest]: I mean, that is the most comprehensive document, the most well-researched document coming out
[Guest]: on the Indian education system.
[Guest]: So, you know, when you have 10 crore individuals who have passed through, who are literate,
[Guest]: okay, but they can't, you know, read, they can't write and they can't do basic maths,
[Guest]: so then their ability to find a half-decent job goes down dramatically.
[Guest]: So what we call a demographic dividend, you know, basically, you know, every month 1 million
[Guest]: individuals are entering the workforce, so which means 1.2 crore Indians, you know, new
[Guest]: individuals are entering the workforce every year.
[Guest]: And this is likely to continue over a period of next one and a half to two decades.
[Guest]: Now one is, you know, when these individuals are not, do not have their basic educational
[Guest]: outcomes in place, you know, what sort of a job can they really expect at the end of
[Guest]: the day.
[Guest]: So that is another huge unseen effect of, you know, right to education.
[Amit Varma]: Which just goes to show that getting education wrong impact society at all levels.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like to discuss this more with you.
[Amit Varma]: So in the next episode, let's talk about jobs.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Thanks, Vivek.
[Unknown]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: We're going to take the natural leap from education to jobs, but that's in the next
[Amit Varma]: episode.
[Amit Varma]: Do come back next week and do hop over to scene unseen.in where you can browse previous
[Amit Varma]: episodes including episode nine, which I'd recorded with Parth Shah on the profit motive
[Amit Varma]: in education.
[Unknown]: Goodbye for now.
[Unknown]: Next week on the scene and the unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Vivek Kaul about
[Unknown]: jobs.
[Unknown]: For more, go to scene unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene and the unseen, check out another hit show from
[Amit Varma]: Indusworks Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: Brocha.
[Unknown]: Thank you.